{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Calibri;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\fs24
\b ShelfSense API Coursework Report\par
\b0
\par
Module: XJCO3011 Web Services and Web Data\par
Project: ShelfSense API\par
Repository: https://github.com/CwhyT/web_cw1.git\par
\par
\b 1. Introduction\par
\b0
ShelfSense API is a data-driven RESTful web API for book discovery and personal reading management. The project was developed for the XJCO3011 coursework and combines public book metadata from Open Library with locally stored user data, reading lists, reviews, analytics, and recommendation features. The aim of the system is to provide a practical example of a modern API that supports CRUD operations, SQL database integration, external API integration, authentication, and clear documentation.\par
\par
\b 2. Problem Definition and Scope\par
\b0
The project focuses on three connected use cases:\par
- searching and viewing book information from a public source\par
- allowing users to manage their own reading lists and reviews\par
- analysing saved user activity to generate insights and recommendations\par
\par
This scope was selected because it fits the coursework brief well. It naturally supports SQL-backed CRUD, standard HTTP endpoints, JSON responses, and a clear relational database design, while also allowing more advanced features such as authentication, analytics, and recommendation logic.\par
\par
\b 3. Technical Stack and Justification\par
\b0
\b FastAPI\par
\b0
FastAPI was chosen as the backend framework because it is well suited for building RESTful JSON APIs quickly and clearly. It also automatically generates interactive documentation through Swagger UI and ReDoc, which is useful for development, testing, and oral demonstration.\par
\par
\b SQLAlchemy\par
\b0
SQLAlchemy was chosen as the ORM because it provides a clear mapping between Python models and relational database tables. This helped keep the data model explicit and aligned with the coursework requirement for SQL-based CRUD functionality.\par
\par
\b SQLite\par
\b0
SQLite was selected for development because it is lightweight, easy to configure, and suitable for a coursework-scale prototype. It allows fast local iteration without requiring additional infrastructure. The design is still portable enough to move to another SQL database later if required.\par
\par
\b Open Library\par
\b0
Open Library was used as the external data source because it provides public book metadata and a relatively simple API structure. This made it suitable for integrating live search and detail lookup without maintaining a full local book catalogue.\par
\par
\b 4. API Design\par
\b0
The system is implemented as a RESTful API. Resource-oriented endpoints are used for users, books, reading lists, reviews, analytics, and recommendations. Standard HTTP methods are used consistently:\par
- GET for retrieval\par
- POST for creation\par
- PUT for updates\par
- DELETE for deletion\par
\par
Responses are returned in JSON, and conventional status codes are used to signal success and failure. Protected endpoints use Bearer token authentication.\par
\par
\b 5. Database Design\par
\b0
The main database tables are:\par
- users\par
- books\par
- reading_lists\par
- reading_list_items\par
- reviews\par
\par
The books table acts as a local cache for books that users save into their reading lists. This design simplifies later analytics and recommendation queries because the API can operate on local relational data instead of calling the external service every time.\par
\par
The main relationships are:\par
- one user to many reading lists\par
- one reading list to many reading list items\par
- one user to many reviews\par
- one book to many reviews\par
\par
\b 6. Implemented Features\par
\b0
The final implementation includes:\par
- user registration\par
- login and bearer-token authentication\par
- current user lookup\par
- book search via Open Library\par
- book detail retrieval via Open Library\par
- reading list CRUD\par
- reading list item management\par
- review CRUD\par
- genre analytics\par
- user preference analytics\par
- rule-based recommendations\par
\par
This means the project goes beyond the minimum pass requirement by including authentication, analytics, recommendation logic, and integration with an external service.\par
\par
\b 7. Testing Strategy\par
\b0
Testing was performed with pytest and FastAPI's TestClient. The test suite covers:\par
- authentication success and failure cases\par
- book search and detail transformation\par
- reading list creation and access control\par
- review CRUD and permission checks\par
- analytics and recommendation endpoints\par
- concise validation error behaviour\par
\par
At the current stage, the project test suite reports 16 passed tests.\par
\par
\b 8. Challenges and Solutions\par
\b0
One challenge was balancing an external public data source with a local SQL database. This was addressed by using Open Library for search and detail lookup, while caching selected books locally when they are added to reading lists.\par
\par
Another challenge was authentication. Instead of leaving all CRUD routes open, the project was extended with Bearer-token authentication and ownership checks so that users can only modify their own lists and reviews.\par
\par
A further challenge was keeping recommendation logic simple enough for a coursework project while still demonstrating analytical value. This was solved through a rule-based recommendation approach that scores books by preferred subjects and authors based on user reading-list and review history.\par
\par
\b 9. Error Handling and Validation\par
\b0
The API uses conventional status codes and includes concise validation messages. Examples include:\par
- 401 Unauthorized for missing or invalid authentication\par
- 403 Forbidden for ownership violations\par
- 404 Not Found for missing resources\par
- 409 Conflict for duplicate registration or duplicate list entries\par
- 422 validation messages such as "Invalid email format" or "Rating must be between 1 and 5"\par
\par
\b 10. Limitations\par
\b0
The project has several limitations:\par
- it is currently designed mainly for local execution with SQLite\par
- recommendation logic is rule-based rather than machine-learning-based\par
- Open Library availability affects live search and detail requests\par
- the project does not currently include a frontend client\par
- API documentation still needs to be exported as a formal PDF for submission\par
\par
\b 11. Future Improvements\par
\b0
Possible future improvements include:\par
- deployment to a hosted platform\par
- migration from SQLite to PostgreSQL\par
- stronger JWT-based authentication\par
- more advanced recommendation ranking\par
- richer analytics output or dashboard support\par
- PDF export of API documentation and more polished submission packaging\par
\par
\b 12. Conclusion\par
\b0
ShelfSense API demonstrates a complete RESTful API development workflow, from problem scoping and database design to authentication, testing, analytics, and documentation. It satisfies the core coursework expectations for SQL-backed CRUD, external data integration, JSON APIs, and technical justification. The current implementation is functional, testable, and well suited for presentation and further polishing into the final coursework submission.\par
\par
\b 13. GenAI Declaration\par
\b0
Generative AI tools were used during the development of this coursework in a declared and supportive capacity. AI was not used as an unreviewed substitute for submission ownership; instead, it was used to assist with planning, translation of the coursework brief, documentation refinement, debugging support, test-coverage improvements, and reflective review of the project structure.\par
\par
All AI-assisted suggestions were manually reviewed before being kept, adapted, or rejected. Final design decisions, repository structure, and code integration were verified through local testing and iterative revision.\par
\par
\b 14. Main Uses of GenAI\par
\b0
The main categories of use were:\par
- analysing and translating the coursework brief\par
- narrowing the project topic and data source\par
- structuring the API design and development process\par
- improving README and API documentation drafts\par
- identifying missing submission materials\par
- refining validation messages and test coverage\par
\par
\b 15. Reflection on GenAI Use\par
\b0
The most useful role of GenAI in this project was accelerating high-level planning and documentation quality. It reduced time spent on repetitive structuring work and helped identify missing requirements such as authentication coverage, testing gaps, and submission materials. However, AI-generated suggestions still required manual checking, especially where API behaviour, repository structure, and coursework alignment were concerned.\par
\par
\b 16. Conversation Log Appendix Placeholder\par
\b0
Before final submission, this section should be replaced or supplemented with selected exported conversation-log extracts or screenshots that demonstrate representative AI usage, such as:\par
- project planning\par
- technical writing support\par
- debugging\par
- testing improvements\par
\par
\b 17. References\par
\b0
- Open Library Developers: https://openlibrary.org/developers\par
- FastAPI Documentation: https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/\par
- SQLAlchemy Documentation: https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/\par
\par
\b Submission note:\par
\b0
This file is a single-document draft intended to be opened in Microsoft Word or uploaded to another writing assistant for refinement into the final submission version.\par
}
